---
layout: post
title: The Unacknowledged Convergence of Open Source, Open Access and Open Science
author: John Willinsky
---

**NOTE**: This is *not* my article. This is just a reformat and mirror of a [paper by John Willinsky](https://firstmonday.org/article/view/1265/1185) because the original link renders slow.

## Abstract

A number of open initiatives are actively resisting the extension of intellectual property rights. Among these developments, three prominent instances — open source software, open access to research and scholarship, and open science — share not only a commitment to the unrestricted exchange of information and ideas, but economic principles based on (1) the efficacy of free software and research; (2) the reputation–building afforded by public access and patronage; and, (3) the emergence of a free–or–subscribe access model. Still, with this much in common, the strong sense of convergence among these open initiatives has yet to be fully realized, to the detriment of the larger, common issue. By drawing on David’s (2004; 2003; 2000; 1998) economic work on open science and Weber’s (2004) analysis of open source, this paper seeks to make that convergence all the more apparent, as well as worth pursuing, by those interested in furthering this alternative approach, which would treat intellectual properties as public goods.

## Introduction

The poet John Donlan has an image in his recent poem, "An Economics of Happiness," that is drawn from his childhood days in rural Ontario, when the Orange Day Parade was one of the summer’s big events. In those days, a child could make a dollar carrying a sign in the July 12th parade that read, "Our Guide to the Open Bible," while following carefully behind Orange King Billy (William of Orange), who led on horseback what is the longest standing annual parade in North America<span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">
Donlan’s "An Economics of Happiness" (2002–2004) begins:
<br/>
I’ll see your mistake, and double it.<br/>
Orange King Billy, Our Guide To the Open Bible,<br/>
proclaims, "It’s just a text," but we suspect<br/>
plant scents, or cloud ripples on ponds<br/>
<br/>
are irreducible, pointing at nothing …<br/>
but themselves, our efforts to capture them<br/>
bright innocent chalk smears on slate,<br/>
unwitting self–portraits<br/>
made for praise, half–consciously, the food<br/>
we need to grow into our loneliness … <br/>
</span>. The parade celebrates the Glorious Revolution of 1688 in which William defeated the King, James II, a convert to Catholicism and, as such, a threat to English Protestantism and its open–book approach to the Bible. In looking into prominence given to the Open Bible in the parade, I was struck by how pervasive themes of openness were during this period. When William summoned his wife, Princess Mary, by royal yacht from Holland after his victory, she made a point of bringing along John Locke, one of the revolution’s intellectual backers, who had been very busy during his exile in Holland composing what turned out to be major statements on natural rights, representative government, and the pursuit of life, liberty, and property. The subsequent reign of William and Mary from 1689 to 1702 saw not only a re–opening of the Bible (although James had never really closed it), but a shift of power from crown to Parliament, creating a democratic opening for, among other things, one of the first bill of rights, securing freedom of speech for members of Parliament (even as the Penal Laws, introduced in 1691, began to rob Irish Catholics of rights to education, voting, and land)<span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">
Marx (1887, VIII, chapter 27) offers a tempering of this celebrated event, for in his estimation, "the ‘glorious Revolution’ brought into power, along with William of Orange, the landlord and capitalist appropriators of surplus–value." Marx illustrates the point by pointing to the enclosure (and thus appropriation) of the commons by the landed classes, introducing yet a further historical parallel with the Creative Commons’ efforts to recast copyright law by providing creators with a new range of licensing agreements, based on retaining limited rights while opening up others for public use. 
</span>.


Adding to the period’s somewhat shaky spirit of openness was the rise of the periodical, filling the streets and coffee houses with news and opinion, and an increasing public interest in scientific inquiry. The Royal Society of London for Improving of Natural Knowledge, founded in 1660, is but the most famous of dozens of science clubs that sprang during this period, with women, as part of that openness, playing a considerable role in their formation (Reynolds, 1920). It was not long before the meetings of the Royal Society were being made public each month through the 16–page Philosophical Transactions, which was but one of dozens of "scientific" periodicals launched across Europe during the 17th century (Kronick, 1976). In the eyes of Stanford economist Paul A. David, it adds up to an "open science revolution," signaling "a profound epistemological transformation effected by the fusion of [17th century] experimentalism with Renaissance mathematics," which "represented a break from the previous dominant ethos of secrecy in the pursuit of 'Nature’s Secrets'
<span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">
David, 2004, pp. 574, 572. David draws principally on William Eamon (1985) for the concept of open science, as Eamon analyzed the growing openness and public quality of early modern experimental science, in a move away from the medieval "book of secrets," even as Eamon warns that "the debate over the secrecy versus openness in science continues" and cautions scientists (if not publishers) "not to impede the flow of information for private gain" (pp. 346–347).
</span>.
This new openness in scientific matters was also bolstered by the legal recognition of intellectual property rights, beginning with the Licensing Act of 1662 and leading up to Queen Anne’s 1710 Act for the Encouragement of Learning. The 1710 Act was, in effect, the first copyright law; it recognized an author’s work as form of property, arguably based on Locke’s notion that property results from the personal investment of labor <span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">
Locke: "The labour of his body, and the work of his hands, we may say, are properly his. Whatsoever then he removes out of the state that nature hath provided, and left it in, he hath mixed his labour with, and joined to it something that is his own, and thereby makes it his property" (2002, pp. 12–13). 
</span>.

This brief parade of Protestantism, Enlightenment, empiricism, and experimental science might well be accompanied by a child carrying a placard that read, "Our Guide to Open Knowledge." Certainly, the convergence around themes of openness during that era has been noted before
<span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">
See, for example, Robert Merton (1970, pp. 80, 87, 88) on the 17th century Protestant ethic: "Its ascetic imperatives established a broad base for scientific inquiry, dignifying, exalting, consecrating such inquiry," as well as upholding "the good of the many," which Merton supports by citing Robert Boyle’s last will and testament in 1691, which wished success for those who would "discover the true Nature of the Works of God" for "the Comfort of Mankind." J.R. Jacob (1978) challenges this view, at least in the case of Robert Boyle, for whom Jacob feels that Cromwell’s English revolution (1649–1660), rather than Puritanism was the instrumental force in pushing science to the fore as both a private interest and public good, in Boyle’s case.
</span>. However, this earlier convergence also speaks to me of a similar, if unrealized, convergence around these same themes Today. It is taking place among traditional and new open approaches to knowledge, open to access, use, and exchange in ways that are otherwise in danger of being unduly restricted and foreclosed within the current knowledge–based economy.

At the forefront of today’s open initiatives is open source software, which has proven a viable alternative to the proprietary software products offered by Microsoft and other companies. The leading instance of open source software is the operating system Linux, which is an option when ordering IBM and Dell computers, and is used to run the large server farms maintained by Google and eBay. Linux alone challenges fortress Microsoft, and is proving the software hope for developing nations. It can be downloaded without charge, with a large global community of supporters who gather around Web sites such as SourceForge.org, which provides ready access to over 60,000 open source software projects.

Open source software is often portrayed as a breakthrough in the free and open exchange of intellectual property, without precedent in the prevailing global capitalist mentality. It is usually treated as an isolated economic anomaly, as "counter–intuitive"<span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">Weber, 2004, p. 1. </span>. and an "aberrant form of behavior" in the world of business <span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">Dalle, et al., 2005, p. 2.</span>, or more benignly, "somewhat mysterious"<span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">Ghosh, 2005, p. 1.</span>, a "quite amazing phenomenon"<span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">Benkler, 2005, p. 169.</span>, and an "‘impossible’ public good" <span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">Kollock, 1999, p. 230.</span>. If you look at open source strictly within a business framework, then indeed, it is pursuing a radically different approach to intellectual property compared to the approach taken by Microsoft and other manufacturers of proprietary software. But to pursue a strictly business perspective on open source software only serves to prevent readers from realizing open source’s close connections to the long–standing traditions of open science. It also keeps the open source movement from forming a greater alliance with the more recent open access movement, which is attracting considerable attention today among government agencies involved in research, scholarly publishers, and university libraries in its efforts to provide a viable alternative or supplement to commercially driven forms of scholarly publishing (Willinsky, in press) <span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">Among the sources consulted on open source software, Benkler’s (2005) conception of peer production and Love and Hubbard’s (2005) work on public goods acknowledge the link, if only in passing, between open source and open access. </span>.

<blockquote>
  <p>To pursue a strictly business perspective on open source software only serves to prevent readers from realizing open source’s close connections to the long–standing traditions of open science.</p>
</blockquote>

The principle of open access is simple enough. It is about being able to find and read research and scholarship online at no additional cost. At this point, only a small proportion of the peer–reviewed literature is available to readers and libraries without charge, although a number of economic approaches to open access have been developed over the last decade (Willinsky, 2003). For example, the vast majority of journals now grant their authors permission to post their work in open access institutional repositories (also known as e–print archives) run by their universities or other groups. There are also open access journals in most disciplines that make the author’s work immediately available to readers at no charge <span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">
Authors are able to self–archive their published work, using open source systems often hosted by their university libraries (using eprints.org or DSpace) that ensure that archived work appears in indexes of open access materials and by the more than 92 percent of journals published today that permit some form of archiving, judging by the substantial sampling of the policies for some 8,460 titles represented on SHERPA Publisher Copyright Policies & Self–Archiving database ([http://romeo.eprints.org/](http://romeo.eprints.org/)).</span>. And not surprisingly, articles which are made open access are cited more often than those that can only be viewed by subscription.

Both open source software and open access to research represent innovative responses to the particular restrictions placed on the sharing and exchange of software code and research publications, respectively, imposed by current intellectual property economics. Those same economics are also affecting, not surprisingly, open science. Access to scientific knowledge is increasingly subject to "proprietary rules" related to "industrial profit–goals," in David’s terms, or to being classified as "defense–related"
<span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">David, 1998, p. 15</span>. Just as new information technologies promise "unprecedentedly rapid and unfettered access to new knowledge," industry is ensuring that "the proliferation of intellectual property rights and measures to protect these is tending to inhibit access to such information" <span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">David, 2003, p. 27. </span>. David uses the property rights granted over scientific databases (to the exclusion of fair use) in the European Community, which he sees as nothing less than a "tragedy of the public knowledge commons," <span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">David, 2000, p. 1; see also Rodriquez, 2005. </span>. The response from science’s defenders has taken the form of an open data movement, which has had a substantial impact on a range of important scientific initiatives, from the Human Genome Project to the Global Positioning Satellite system <span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">The U.S. National Academies has become involved in open data questions through its Committee on Data for Science and Technology, which is devoted to ["improving the quality and accessibility of data"](http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/). See for example, the [Strategies for Preservation of and Open Access to Digital Scientific Data in China Conference, 22–24 June 2004](http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnc-codata/chinese_workshop.html). </span>.

The extension of these property rights — and the very high cost of utilizing the properties in question — against the prospect of unfettered access, is very much the issue behind open access initiatives. The publishing economy of scholarly journals is dominated by a rather perverse property relation, in which the last investor in the research production chain — consisting of university, researcher, funding agency, and publisher — owns the resulting work outright through a very small investment in relation to the work’s overall cost and value <span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">
If the average U.S. National Institute Health article represents USD 40,000 worth of research funding (with USD 26 billion a year in NIH research funding leading to the publication of 60,000 articles) and perhaps USD 20,000 of university support above that covered in the grant, the publisher invests no more than USD 2,000 but not before securing the copyright for the resulting research article.
</span>. The great increase in journal subscription prices over the last two decades, largely as a result of corporate concentration in scholarly publishing, has led to what economists would term the "dead–weight burden of monopoly," in which "some people’s desires will remain unsatisfied even though they could have been fulfilled at virtually no additional cost" <span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">
David, 2003, p. 28. 
</span>.

Open source and open access are responses to new technologies running under old economies. They are resisting the knowledge–lockdown approaches of corporate intellectual–property concentration. Or to put it another way, the relatively recent phenomenon of open source software, dating back to the 1980s, and the even more recent open access movement in scholarly journal publishing, are responding to pressing contemporary threats to that original and continuing spirit of science and scholarship as defining one important aspect of what Locke termed the "commonwealth of learning"<span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">
Locke, 1812, n.p. 
</span>.

<blockquote>
  <p>The publishing economy of scholarly journals is dominated by a rather perverse property relation, in which the last investor in the research production chain — consisting of university, researcher, funding agency, and publisher — owns the resulting work outright through a very small investment in relation to the work’s overall cost and value.</p>
</blockquote>

While this paper focuses on how the common wealth of the open source movement relates to open access and open science, these are but three of a good number of open initiatives. Think of the open university movement, which was born in the United Kingdom during the 1960s and in "the ‘White Heat of Technology’ era," as its Web site puts it (Open University, 2005) <span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">
At the risk of overloading the historical cart here, the Open University also has a 17th century precedent in Gresham College, where the Royal Society of London took shape in the mid–1600s, as it had been established in 1598 with seven professorships lodged in Thomas Gresham’s London mansion for the purpose of, along with their studies, reading public lectures in Law, Rhetoric, Divinity, Music, Geometry and Astronomy (Johnson, 1940, p. 422).
</span>. Open universities are now found in Hong Kong, Israel, Sri Lanka, Canada, and elsewhere. MIT, to its credit, can point to its leadership in the Open Knowledge Initiative, Open Courseware, and DSpace, all devoted to opening access to intellectual resources, including software and research, often with corporate patronage. The online publications AlwaysOn and Technocrati recently announced their list of the Open Media 100 (Perkins, 2005). I would also count the Creative Commons as a further extension of the open theme, intent as it is on opening copyright to the possibilities of sharing work in new ways (Lessig, 2004) <span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">
[Creative Commons](http://creativecommons.org/) "is a nonprofit that offers a flexible copyright for creative work" . See also [BIOS — Biological Innovation for Open Society]((http://www.bios.net/daisy/bios/15)) "a new initiative … to extend the metaphor and concepts of open source and distributive innovation to biotechnology and other forms of innovation in biology"; Nature’s editorial, "Open–source biology" (2004); and, to keep things in perspective, the Campbell, et al. report, "Data Withholding in Academic Genetics" (2002). 
</span>. The advocates and champions of these different initiatives have yet to unite in any noticeable way around their shared interests in the commonwealth of learning and access to public goods <span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">
While I touch on the relation of "open" to "free" in this paper, the twentieth–century politics and metaphysics of the open metaphor waits to be told, going back at least to Karl Popper’s The open society and its enemies (1971), which he started in the 1930s in taking aim at fascist and communist regimes, and leading up to post–Soviet critiques of the threats that the major corporate interests pose to freedom, liberty, and creativity (Lessig, 2004). </span>.

While the ideals and economics of open science may link a good number of these open initiatives, it will not do to go any further in this discussion without recognizing that, in reality, science has rarely if ever been any more open than the times in which it operates, and often less so. Consider the scientific involvement of women (Keller, 1985; Harding, 1991), working classes (Rose, 2001), or non–Westerners (Kumar, 1991; Drayton, 2000). Think about how susceptible science proved to the forces of tyranny, under National Socialism in Nazi Germany (Renneberg and Walker, 1994). But then it is not always completely open to new ideas (Kuhn, 1962) or to reporting on the complete laboratory process behind experiments (Latour and Woolgar, 1979).

In recent times, the shortcomings of open science have taken a new twist with the rise of what Etzkowtiz (1983) identified some two decades ago as the "entrepreneurial university." A raft of books and articles are sounding the alarm over what former Harvard president Derek Bok, in Universities in the marketplace: The commercialization of higher education, identifies as a threat to "basic academic principles," as faculty members no longer see their work as "a calling rather than just another way to earn a living" <span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">
Bok, 2003, pp. 206–207; see also, Washburn, 2004; Geiger, 2004; Gould, 2003; Aronowitz, 2000; Slaughter and Leslie, 1997. </span>. While these books generally hold the university’s entrepreneurial tendencies responsible for undermining the quality of intellectual life on campus, this may seem to have little to do with securing greater access to software and journals.

However, open source and open access are nothing less than two practical and proven means of resisting that constant capitalization of knowledge work that marks this economy <span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">
Andrew Abbott (2002, p. 223) does a good job of identifying the underlying economic change in higher education (although without naming the counter "open" initiatives): "A second broad change is the move of capitalism — and of capitalistic conception of intellectual property — deep into the academic world … . Like the commons of early modern England, academic knowledge is essentially an enormous public resource that the commercial sector will simply claim as property (as no one else has) or buy up at cheap rates." One exception to note is Johns Hopkins University, established as the first research university in the United States in 1876, which refuses to turn away from the public sphere, judging by the stance taken by Hopkins’ president, William Brody: "When Hopkins scientists discovered restriction enzymes, one of the bases of the biotechnology industry, we put the discovery in the public domain — losing millions and millions in potential royalties. Foolish? Perhaps. But I know that we didn’t slow science down or diminish the leading role [that] American industry plays in this field" (cited by Feldman and Desrochers, 2004). On recent, positive efforts by state governments to move beyond "technology transfer" in their support for basic university research, see Geiger and Sá (2005). 
</span>. They are ways of affirming the university’s ability to contribute to the public good. Those who would resist the commercialization of higher education would do well to recognize the convergence of interests among open source, open access, and other open initiatives, in a world that can otherwise seem all–too–ready to allow shareholder–value to drive the pursuit of knowledge <span class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></span><span class="sidenote">
In terms of scope, it is interesting to note how Richard Stallman (2005, p. 332) has gone so far as to position "free software and the allied questions of other kinds of information" in alignment with the anti–globalization movement in "resisting the tendency give business power over the public and governments" 
</span>. I would go so far as to argue that this alignment is underwritten by three closely related economic principles that make possible an open realm that is deeply committed to sharing and exchanging intellectual properties and resources.

The first of these principles is that when it comes to being open, the price of admission matters. Open source software may be free in the sense of free speech, but having free access to this software is critical to its effectiveness, just as any reasonable hope for global participation in the circulation of knowledge depends on open (or free) access to research and scholarship.

The second principle, in a point owed to Paul A. David, is that this intellectual openness has been traditionally supported by various forms of patronage. This patron–economy still has a very strong place for intellectual property rights, although those rights are not concerned with excluding and restricting access, but just the opposite, with a focus on authorship claims related to priority (who was first) and propriety (proper citation). It is a focus, within open intellectual economies, that appears cable of both feeding rivalries among reputations (e.g., prizes and awards), as well as consistent patterns of collaboration and cooperation (e.g., multi–authored projects and peer review).

The third principle is that open alternatives to intellectual property regimes still operate within the dominant economy. The alternative economy of ideas may be quick to exploit new technologies to preserve its openness — whether one thinks of the mimeographed underground press of 1960s Eastern Europe or today’s open access journals and archives — even as it is subject to economic forces outside its purview. In the case of open source and open access, this mixed economy is taking the form of a free–or–subscribe model. It is still too early to judge the long–term sustainability of a free–or–subscribe model for accessing intellectual properties and public goods, but then the very convergence among these various open economies has yet to be realized, which is why I wish to spell these principles out in some detail.