---
layout: post
title: "On the Mechanics of Economic Development"
author: "Robert E. Lucas, Jr."
category: classic_papers
published: 1988-02-01
twitter_image: 
tag: Social Science
notes: 
---

## Abstract

This paper considers the prospects for constructing a neoclassical theory of growth and international trade that is consistent with some of the main features of economic development. Three models are considered and compared to evidence: a model emphasizing physical capital accumulation and technological change, a model emphasizing human capital accumulation through schooling. and a model emphasizing specialized human capital accumulation through learning-by-doing.

## 1. Introduction

By the problem of economic development I mean simply the problem of accounting for the observed pattern, across countries and across time, in levels and rates of growth of per capita income. This may seem too narrow a definition, and perhaps it is, but thinking about income patterns will necessarily involve us in thinking about many other aspects of societies too, so I would suggest that we withhold judgment on the scope of this definition until we have a clearer idea of where it leads us.

The main features of levels and rates of growth of national incomes are well enough known to all of us, but I want to begin with a few numbers, so as to set a quantitative tone and to keep us from getting mired in the wrong kind of details. Unless I say otherwise, all figures are from the World Bank’s *World Development Report* of 1983.

The diversity across countries in measured per capita income levels is literally too great to be believed. Compared to the 1980 average for what the World Bank calls the ‘industrial market economies’ (Ireland up through Switzerland) of U.S. <span>$</span> 10,000, India’s per capita income is <span>$</span>240, Haiti’s is <span>$</span>270, and so on for the rest of the very poorest countries. This is a difference of a factor of 40 in living standards! These latter figures are too low to sustain life in, say, England or the United States, so they cannot be taken at face value and I will avoid hanging too much on their exact magnitudes. But I do not think anyone will argue that there is not enormous diversity in living stan- dards.<label for="sn-1" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="sn-1" class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
The income estimates reported in Summers and Heston (1984) are more satisfactory than those in the World Development Reports. In 1975 U.S. dollars, these authors estimate 1980 U.S. real GDP per capita at <span>$</span>8000, and for the industrialized economies as a group, <span>$</span>5900. The comparable figures for India and Haiti are <span>$</span>460 and <span>$</span>500, respectively. Income differences of a factor of 16 are certainly smaller, and I think more accurate, than a factor of 40, but I think they are still fairly described as exhibiting ‘enormous diversity’.</span>

Rates of growth of real per capita GNP are also diverse, even over sustained periods. For 1960-80 we observe, for example: India, 1.4% per year, Egypt, 3.4%: South Korea, 7.0%; Japan, 7.1%; the United States, 2.3%; the industrial economies averaged 3.6%. To obtain from growth rates the number of years it takes for incomes to double, divide these numbers into 69 (the log of 2 times 100). Then Indian incomes will double every 50 years; Korean every 10. An Indian will, on average, be twice as well off as his grandfather; a Korean 32 times. These differences are at least as striking as differences in income levels, and in some respects more trustworthy, since within-country income comparisons are easier to draw than across-country comparisons.

I have not calculated a correlation across countries between income levels and rates of growth, but it would not be far from zero. (The poorest countries tend to have the lowest growth; the wealthiest next; the ‘middle-income’ countries highest.) The generalizations that strike the eye have to do with variability within these broad groups: the rich countries show little diversity (Japan excepted — else it would not have been classed as a rich country in 1980 at all). Within the poor countries (low and middle income) there is enormous variability.<label for="sn-2" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="sn-2" class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
Baumol (1986) summarizes evidence, mainly from Maddison (1982) indicating apparent convergence during this century to a common path of the income levels of the wealthiest countries. But De Long (1987) shows that this effect is entirely due to ‘selection bias’: If one examines the countries with the highest income levels at the *beginning* of the century (as opposed to currently, as in Maddison’s ‘sample’) the data show apparent *divergence*!</span>

Within the advanced countries, growth rates tend to be very stable over long periods of time, provided one averages over periods long enough to eliminate business-cycle effects (or corrects for short-term fluctuations in some other way). For poorer countries, however, there are many examples of sudden, large changes in growth rates, both up and down. Some of these changes are no doubt due to political or military disruption: Angola’s total GDP growth fell from 4.8 in the 60s to —9.2 in the 70s; Iran’s fell from 11.3 to 2.5, comparing the same two periods. I do not think we need to look to economic theory for an account of either of *these* declines. There are also some striking examples of sharp increases in growth rates. The four East Asian ‘miracles’ of South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore are the most familiar: for the 1960-80 period, per capita income in these economies grew at rates of 7.0, 6.5, 6.8 and 7.5, respectively, compared to much lower rates in the 1950’s and earlier.<label for="sn-34" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="sn-34" class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
The World Bank no longer transmits data for Taiwan. The figure 6.5 in the text is from Harberger (1984, table 1, p. 9).
According to Heston and Summers (1984), Taiwan’s per-capita GDP growth rate in the 1950s was 3.6. South Korea’s was 1.7 from 1953 to 1960.
</span> Between the 60s and the 70s, Indonesia’s GDP growth increased from 3.9 to 7.5; Syria’s from 4.6 to 10.0.

I do not see how one can look at figures like these without seeing them as representing *possibilities*. Is there some action a government of India could take that would lead the Indian economy to grow like Indonesia's or Egypt's? If so, *what*, exactly? If not, what is it about the ‘nature of India’ that makes it so? The consequences for human welfare involved in questions like these are simply staggering: Once one starts to think about them, it is hard to think about anything else.

This is what we need a theory of economic development *for*: to provide some kind of framework for organizing facts like these, for judging which represent opportunities and which necessities. But the term ‘theory’ is used in so many different ways, even within economics, that if I do not clarify what I mean by it early on, the gap between what I think I am saying and what you think you are hearing will grow too wide for us to have a serious discussion. I prefer to use the term ‘theory’ in a very narrow sense, to refer to an explicit dynamic system, something that can be put on a computer and *run*. This is what I mean by the ‘mechanics’ of economic development — the construction of a mechanical, artificial world, populated by the interacting robots that economics typically studies, that is capable of exhibiting behavior the gross features of which resemble those of the actual world that I have just described. My lectures will be occupied with one such construction, and it will take some work: It is easy to set out models of economic growth based on reasonable-looking axioms that predict the cessation of growth in a few decades, or that predict the rapid convergence of the living standards of different economies to a common level, or that otherwise produce logically possible outcomes that bear no resemblance to the outcomes produced by actual economic systems. On the other hand, there is no doubt that there must be mechanics other than the ones I will describe that would fit the facts about as well as mine. This is why I have titled the lectures ‘On the Mechanics ...’ rather than simply ‘The Mechanics of Economic Development’. At some point, then, the study of development will need to involve working out the implications of competing theories for data other than those they were constructed to fit, and testing these implications against observation. But this is getting far ahead of the story I have to tell, which will involve leaving many important questions open even at the purely theoretical level and will touch upon questions of empirical testing hardly at all.

My plan is as follows. I will begin with an application of a now-standard neoclassical model to the study of twentieth century U.S. growth, closely following the work of Robert Solow, Edward Denison and many others. I will then ask, somewhat unfairly, whether this model *as it stands* is an adequate model of economic development, concluding that it is not. Next, I will consider two adaptations of this standard model to include the effects of human capital accumulation. The first retains the one-sector character of the original model and focuses on the interaction of physical and human capital accumulation. The second examines a two-good system that admits specialized human capital of different kinds and offers interesting possibilities for the interaction of trade and development. Finally, I will turn to a discussion of what has been arrived at and of what is yet to be done.

In general, I will be focusing on various aspects of what economists, using the term very broadly, call the ‘technology’. I will be abstracting altogether from the economics of demography, taking population growth as a given throughout. This is a serious omission, for which I can only offer the excuse that a serious discussion of demographic issues would be at least as difficult as the issues I will be discussing and I have neither the time nor the knowledge to do both. I hope the interactions between these topics are not such that they cannot usefully be considered separately, at least in a preliminary way.<label for="sn-5" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="sn-5" class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
Becker and Barro (1985) is the first attempt known to me to analyze fertility and capital accumulation decisions *simultaneously* within a general equilibrium framework. Tamura (1986) contains further results along this line.</span>

I will also be abstracting from all monetary matters, treating all exchange as though it involved goods-for-goods. In general, I believe that the importance of financial matters is very badly over-stressed in popular and even much professional discussion and so am not inclined to be apologetic for going to the other extreme. Yet insofar as the development of financial institutions is a limiting factor in development more generally conceived I will be falsifying the picture, and I have no clear idea as to how badly. But one cannot theorize about everything at once. I had better get on with what I do have to say.

## 2. Neoclassical Growth Theory: Review

The example, or model, of a successful theory that I will try to build on is the theory of economic growth that Robert Solow and Edward Denison developed and applied to twentieth century U.S. experience. This theory will serve as a basis for further discussion in three ways: as an example of the *form* that I believe useful aggregative theories must take, as an opportunity to explain exactly what theories of this form can tell us that other kinds of theories cannot, and as a possible theory of economic development. In this third capacity, the theory will be seen to fail badly, but also suggestively. Following up on these suggestions will occupy the remainder of the lectures.

Both Solow and Denison were attempting to account for the main features of U.S. economic growth, not to provide a theory of economic development, and their work was directed at a very different set of observations from the cross-country comparisons I cited in my introduction. The most useful summary is provided in Denison’s 1961 monograph, *The Sources of Economic Growth in the United States*. Unless otherwise mentioned, this is the source for the figures I will cite next.

During the 1909-57 period covered in Denison’s study, U.S. real output grew at an annual rate of 2.9%, employed manhours at 1.3%, and capital stock at 2.4%. The remarkable feature of these figures, as compared to those cited earlier, is their *stability* over time. Even if one takes as a starting point the trough of the Great Depression (1933) output growth to 1957 averages only 5%. If business-cycle effects are removed in any reasonable way (say, by using peak-to-peak growth rates) U.S. output growth is within half a percentage point of 3% annually for any sizeable subperiod for which we have data.

Solow (1956) was able to account for this stability, and also for some of the relative magnitudes of these growth rates, with a very simple but also easily refineable model.<label for="sn-6" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="sn-6" class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
Solow’s 1956 paper stimulated a vast literature in the 1960s, exploring many variations on the original one-sector structure. See Burmeister and Dobell (1970) for an excellent introduction and survey. By putting a relatively simple version to empirical use, as I shall shortly do, I do not intend a negative comment on this body of research. On the contrary, it is exactly this kind of theoretical experimentation with alternative assumptions that is needed to give one the confidence that working with a particular, simple parameterization may, for the specific purpose at hand, be adequate.</span> There are many variations of this model in print. I will set out a particularly simple one that iss chosen also to serve some later purposes. I will do so without much comment on its assumed structure: There is no point in arguing over a model’s assumptions until one is clear on what questions it will be used to answer.

We consider a closed economy with competitive markets, with identical, rational agents and a constant returns technology. At date $t$ there are $N(t)$ persons or, equivalently, manhours devoted to production. The exogenously given rate of growth of $N(t)$ is $\lambda$. Real, per-capita consumption is a stream $c(t), t > 0$, of units of a single good. Preferences over (per-capita) consumption streams are given by

$$ \int_{0}^{\infty}  e^{-\rho t} \frac{1}{1 - \sigma} \left[ c(t)^{1-\sigma} - 1 \right] N(t) dt , \tag{1}$$

where the discount rate $\rho$ and the coefficient of (relative) risk aversion $\sigma$ are both positive.<label for="sn-7" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="sn-7" class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
The inverse $\sigma^{-1}$ of the coefficient of risk aversion is sometimes called the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. Since all the models considered in this paper are deterministic, this latter terminology may be more suitable.</span>

Production per capita of the one good is divided into consumption $c(t)$ and capital accumulation. If we let $K(t)$ denote the total stock of capital, and $\dot{K}(t)$ its rate of change, then total output is $N(t)c(t) + \dot{K}(t)$. [Here $\dot{K}(t)$ is net investment and total output $N(t)e(t) + \dot{K}(t)$ is identified with net national product.] Production is assumed to depend on the levels of capital and labor inputs and on the level $A(t)$ of the ‘technology’, according to

$$ N(t)c(t) + \dot{K}(t) = A(t) {K(t)}^{\beta} {N(t)}^{1-\beta}  \tag{2} $$