---
layout: post
title: "The Strength of Weak Ties"
author: "Mark S. Granovetter"
category: classic_papers
description: ""
published: 1973-05-01
twitter_image: 
tag: Social Science
notes: 
---

## Abstract

Analysis of social networks is suggested as a tool for linking micro and macro levels of sociological theory. The procedure is illustrated by elaboration of the macro implications of one aspect of small-scale interaction: the strength of dyadic ties. It is argued that the degree of overlap of two individuals’ friendship networks varies directly with the strength of their tie to one another. The impact of this principle on diffusion of influence and information, mobility opportunity, and community organization is explored. Stress is laid on the cohesive power of weak ties. Most network models deal, implicitly, with strong ties, thus confining their applicability to small, well- defined groups. Emphasis on weak ties lends itself to discussion of relations between groups and to analysis of segments of social structure not easily defined in terms of primary groups.

## Introduction

A fundamental weakness of current sociological theory is that it does not relate micro-level interactions to macro-level patterns in any convincing way. Large-scale statistical, as well as qualitative, studies offer a good deal of insight into such macro phenomena as social mobility, community organization, and political structure. At the micro level, a large and increasing body of data and theory offers useful and illuminating ideas about what transpires within the confines of the small group. But how interaction in small groups aggregates to form large-scale patterns eludes us in most cases.

I will argue, in this paper, that the analysis of processes in interpersonal networks provides the most fruitful micro-macro bridge. In one way or another, it is through these networks that small-scale interaction becomes translated into large-scale patterns, and that these, in turn, feed back into small groups.

Sociometry, the precursor of network analysis, has always been curiously peripheral—invisible, really—in sociological theory. This is partly because it has usually been studied and applied only as a branch of social psychology; it is also because of the inherent complexities of precise network analysis. We have had neither the theory nor the measurement and sampling techniques to move sociometry from the usual small-group level to that of larger structures. While a number of stimulating and suggestive studies have recently moved in this direction (Bott 1957; Mayer 1961; Milgram 1967; Boissevain 1968; Mitchell 1969), they do not treat struc-tural issues in much theoretical detail. Studies which do so usually involve a level of technical complexity appropriate to such forbidding sources as the *Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics*, where the original motivation for the study of networks was that of developing a theory of neural, rather than social, interaction (see the useful review of this literature by Coleman
[1960]; also Rapoport [1963]).

The strategy of the present paper is to choose a rather limited aspect of small-scale interaction—the strength of interpersonal ties—and to show, in some detail, how the use of network analysis can relate this aspect to such varied macro phenomena as diffusion, social mobility, political organization, and social cohesion in general. While the analysis is essentially qualitative, a mathematically inclined reader will recognize the potential for models; mathematical arguments, leads, and references are suggested mostly in footnotes.

## The Strength of Ties

Most intuitive notions of the “strength” of an interpersonal tie should be satisfied by the following definition: the strength of a tie is a (probably linear) combination of the amount of time, the emotional intensity, the intimacy (mutual confiding), and the reciprocal services which characterize the tie<label for="sn-2" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="sn-2" class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
Ties discussed in this paper are assumed to be positive and symmetric; a comprehensive theory might require discussion of negative and/or asymmetric ties, but this would add unnecessary complexity to the present, exploratory comments.</span>. Each of these is somewhat independent of the other, though the set is obviously highly intracorrelated. Discussion of operational measures of and weights attaching to each of the four elements is postponed to future empirical studies.<label for="sn-3" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="sn-3" class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
Some anthropologists suggest “multiplexity,” that is, multiple contents in a relation- ship, as indicating a strong tie (Kapferer 1969, p. 213). While this may be accurate in some circumstances, ties with only one content or with diffuse content may be strong as well (Simmel 1950, pp. 317-29). The present definition would show most multiplex ties to be strong but also allow for other possibilities.</span> It is sufficient for the present purpose if most of us can agree, on a rough intuitive basis, whether a given tie is strong, weak, or absent.<label for="sn-4" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="sn-4" class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
Included in “absent” are both the lack of any relationship and ties without substantial significance, such as a “nodding” relationship between people living on the same street, or the “tie” to the vendor from whom one customarily buys a morning newspaper. That two people “know” each other by name need not move their relation out of this category if their interaction is negligible. In some contexts, however (disasters, for example), such “negligible” ties might usefully be distinguished from the absence of one. This is an ambiguity caused by substitution, for convenience of exposition, of discrete values for an underlying continuous variable.</span>

Consider, now, any two arbitrarily selected individuals—call them A and B—and the set, S=C,D,E,..., of all persons with ties to either *or* both of them.<label for="sn-5" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="sn-5" class="margin-toggle"/><span class="sidenote">
In Barnes’s terminology, the union of their respective primary stars (1969, p. 58).</span> The hypothesis which enables us to relate dyadic ties to larger structures is: the stronger the tie between A and B, the larger the proportion of individuals in S to whom they will both be tied, that is, connected by a weak or strong tie. This overlap in their friendship circles is predicted to be least when their tie is absent, most when it is strong, and intermediate when it is weak.

The proposed relationship results, first, from the tendency (by definition) of stronger ties to involve larger time commitments. If A-B and A-C ties exist, then the amount of time C spends with B depends (in part) on the amount A spends with B and C, respectively. (If the events “‘A is with B” and “‘A is with C” were independent, then the event “C is with A and B” would have probability equal to the product of their probabilities. For example, if A and B are together 60% of the time, and A and C 40%, then C, A, and B would be together 24% of the time. Such independence would be less likely after than before B and C became acquainted.) If C and B have no relationship, common strong ties to A will probably bring them into interaction and generate one. Implicit here is Homans’s idea that “the more frequently persons interact with one another, the stronger their sentiments of friendship for one another are apt to be” (1950, p. 133).

The hypothesis is made plausible also by empirical evidence that the stronger the tie connecting two individuals, the more similar they are, in various ways (Berscheid and Walster 1969, pp. 69-91; Bramel 1969, pp. 9-16; Brown 1965, pp. 71-90; Laumann 1968; Newcomb 1961, chap. 5; Precker 1952). Thus, if strong ties connect A to B and A to C, both C and B, being similar to A, are probably similar to one another, increasing the likelihood of a friendship once they have met. Applied in reverse, these two factors—time and similarity—indicate why weaker A-B and A-C ties make a C-B tie less likely than strong ones: C and B are less likely to interact and less likely to be compatible if they do.

The theory of cognitive balance, as formulated by Heider (1958) and especially by Newcomb (1961, pp. 4-23), also predicts this result. If strong ties A-B and A-C exist, and if B and C are aware of one another, anything short of a positive tie would introduce a “psychological strain” into the situation since C will want his own feelings to be congruent with those of his good friend, A, and similarly, for B and *his* friend, A. Where the ties are weak, however, such consistency is psychologically less crucial. (On this point see also Homans [1950, p. 255] and Davis [1963, p. 448].)

Some direct evidence for the basic hypothesis exists (Kapferer 1969, p. 229 n.; Laumann and Schuman 1967; Rapoport and Horvath 1961; Rapoport 1963).<label for="sn-6" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="sn-6" class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
The models and experiments of Rapoport and his associates have been a major stimulus to this paper. In 1954 he commented on the “well-known fact that the likely contacts of two individuals who are closely acquainted tend to be more overlapping than those of two arbitrarily selected individuals” (p. 75). His and Horvath’s 1961 hypothesis is even closer to mine: “one would expect the friendship relations, and therefore the overlap bias of the acquaintance circles, to become less tight with increasing numerical rank-order” (p. 290). (l.e., best friend, second-best friend, third-best, etc.) Their development of this hypothesis, however, is quite different, substantively and mathematically, from mine (Rapoport 1953a, 1953b, 1954, 1963; Rapoport and Horvath 1961).
</span> This evidence is less comprehensive than one might hope. In addition, however, certain inferences from the hypothesis have received empirical support. Description of these inferences will suggest some of the substantive implications of the above argument.

## Weak Ties in Diffusion Process

To derive implications for large networks of relations, it is necessary to frame the basic hypothesis more precisely. This can be done by investigating the possible triads consisting of strong, weak, or absent ties among A, B, and any arbitrarily chosen friend of either or both (i.e., some member of the set S, described above). A thorough mathematical model would do this in some detail, suggesting probabilities for various types. This analysis becomes rather involved, however, and it is sufficient for my purpose in this paper to say that the triad which is most *unlikely* to occur, under the hypothesis stated above, is that in which A and B are strongly linked, A has a strong tie to some friend C, but the tie between C and B is absent. This triad is shown in figure 1. To see the consequences of this assertion,

<!-- fig1 -->

I will exaggerate it in what follows by supposing that the triad shown never occurs—that is, that the B-C tie is always present (whether weak or strong), given the other two strong ties. Whatever results are inferred from this supposition should tend to occur in the degree that the triad in question tends to be absent.

Some evidence exists for this absence. Analyzing 651 sociograms, Davis (1970, p. 845) found that in 90% of them triads consisting of two mutual choices and one nonchoice occurred less than the expected random number of times. If we assume that mutual choice indicates a strong tie, this is strong evidence in the direction of my argument.<label for="sn-7" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="sn-7" class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
This assumption is suggested by one of Davis’s models (1970, p. 846) and made explicitly by Mazur (1971). It is not obvious, however. In a free-choice sociometric test or a fixed-choice one with a large number of choices, most strong ties would probably result in mutual choice, but some weak ones might as well. With a small, fixed number of choices, most mutual choices should be strong ties, but some strong ties might show up as asymmetric. For a general discussion of the biases introduced by sociometric procedures, see Holland and Leinhardt (1971b).</span> Newcomb (1961, pp. 160- 65) reports that in triads consisting of dyads expressing mutual “high attraction,” the configuration of three strong ties became increasingly frequent as people knew one another longer and better; the frequency of the triad pictured in figure 1 is not analyzed, but it is implied that processes of cognitive balance tended to eliminate it.

The significance of this triad’s absence can be shown by using the concept of a “bridge”; this is a line in a network which provides the only path between two points (Harary, Norman, and Cartwright 1965, p. 198). Since, in general, each person has a great many contacts, a bridge between A and B provides the only route along which information or influence can flow from any contact of A to any contact of B, and, consequently, from anyone connected *indirectly* to A to anyone connected indirectly to B. Thus, in the study of diffusion, we can expect bridges to assume an important role.

Now, if the stipulated triad is absent, it follows that, except under unlikely conditions, *no strong tie is a bridge*. Consider the strong tie A-B: if A has another strong tie to C, then forbidding the triad of figure 1 implies that a tie exists between C and B, so that the path A-C-B exists between A and B; hence, A-B is not a bridge. A strong tie can be a bridge, therefore, *only if* neither party to it has any *other* strong ties, unlikely in a social network of any size (though possible in a small group). Weak ties suffer no such restriction, though they are certainly not automatically bridges. What is important, rather, is that all bridges are weak ties.

<!-- fig2 -->

In large networks it probably happens only rarely, in practice, that a specific tie provides the *only* path between two points. The bridging function may nevertheless be served *locally*. In figure 2a, for example, the tie A-B is not strictly a bridge, since one can construct the path A-E-J-B (and others). Yet, A-B *is* the shortest route to B for F, D, and C. This function is clearer in figure 2b. Here, A-B is, for C, D, and others, not only a local bridge to B, but, in most real instances of diffusion, a much more likely and efficient path. Harary et al. point out that “there may be a distance [length of path] beyond which it is not feasible for u to communicate with v because of costs or distortions entailed in each act of transmission. If v does not lie within this critical distance, then he will not receive messages originating with u (1965, p. 159). I will refer to a tie as a “local bridge of degree n” if n represents the shortest path between its two points (other than itself), and n > 2. In figure 2a, A-B is a local bridge of degree 3, in 2b, of degree 13. As with bridges in a highway system, a local bridge in a social network will be more significant as a connection between two sectors to the extent that it is the only alternative for many people—that is, as its degree increases. A bridge in the absolute sense is a local one of infinite degree. By the same logic used above, only weak ties may be local bridges.

Suppose, now, that we adopt Davis’s suggestion that “in interpersonal flows of most any sort the probability that ‘whatever it is’ will flow from person 7 to person j is (a) directly proportional to the number of all-positive (friendship) paths connecting i and j; and (b) inversely proportional to the length of such paths” (1969, p. 549).<label for="sn-8" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="sn-8" class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
Though this assumption seems plausible, it is by no means self-evident. Surprisingly little empirical evidence exists to support or refute it.</span> The significance of weak ties, then, would be that those which are local bridges create more, and shorter, paths. Any given tie may, hypothetically, be removed from a network; the number of paths broken and the changes in average path length resulting between arbitrary pairs of points (with some limitation on length of path considered) can then be computed. The contention here is that removal of the average weak tie would do more “damage” to transmission probabilities than would that of the average strong one.<label for="sn-9" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="sn-9" class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
In a more comprehensive treatment it would be useful to consider to what extent a set of weak ties may be considered to have bridging functions. This generalization requires a long, complex discussion and is not attempted here (see Harary et al. 1965, pp. 211-16).</span>

Intuitively speaking, this means that whatever is to be diffused can reach a larger number of people, and traverse greater social distance (i.e., path length),<label for="sn-10" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="sn-10" class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
We may define the “social distance” between two individuals in a network as the number of lines in the shortest path from one to another. This is the same as the definition of “distance” between points in graph theory (Harary et al. 1965, pp. 32-33, 138-41). The exact role of this quantity in diffusion and epidemic theory is discussed by Solomonoff and Rapoport (1951).</span> when passed through weak ties rather than strong. If one tells a rumor to all his close friends, and they do likewise, many will hear the rumor a second and third time, since those linked by strong ties tend to share friends. If the motivation to spread the rumor is dampened a bit on each wave of retelling, then the rumor moving through strong ties is much more likely to be limited to a few cliques than that going via weak ones; bridges will not be crossed.<label for="sn-11" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="sn-11" class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
If a damping effect is not specified, the whole population would hear the rumor after a sufficiently large number of retellings, since few real networks include totally self-contained cliques. The effective difference between using weak and strong ties, then, is one of people reached per unit of (ordinal) time. This could be called “velocity” of transmission. I am indebted to Scott Feld for this point.
</span>

Since sociologists and anthropologists have carried out many hundreds of diffusion studies—Rogers’s 1962 review dealt with 506—one might suppose that the above claims could easily be put to test. But this is not so, for several reasons. To begin with, though most diffusion studies find that personal contacts are crucial, many undertake no sociometric investigation. (Rogers [1962] discusses this point.) When sociometric techniques are used, they tend to discourage the naming of those weakly tied to the respondent by sharply limiting the numbers of choices allowed. Hence, the proposed importance of weak ties in diffusion is not measured. Even when more sociometric information is collected there is almost never an attempt to directly retrace the exact interpersonal paths traversed by an (idea, rumor, or) innovation. More commonly, the time when each individual adopted the innovation is recorded, as is the number of sociometric choices he received from others in the study. Those receiving many choices are characterized as “central,” those with few as "marginal"; this variable is then correlated with time of adoption and inferences made about what paths were probably followed by the innovation.

One point of controversy in diffusion studies can be related to my argument. Some have indicated that early innovators are marginal, that they “underconform to norms to such a degree that they are perceived as highly deviant” (Rogers 1962, p. 197). Others (e.g., Coleman, Katz, and Menzel [1966] on the adoption of a new drug by doctors) find that those named more frequently adopt an innovation substantially earlier. Becker (1970) tries to resolve the question of whether early innovators are “central” or “marginal” by referring to the “perceived risks of adoption of a given innovation.” His study of public health innovations shows that when a new program is thought relatively safe and uncontroversial (as with the drug of Coleman et al.), central figures lead in its adoption; otherwise, marginal ones do (p. 273). He explains the difference in terms of a greater desire of “central” figures to protect their professional reputation.

Kerckhoff, Back, and Miller (1965) reach a similar conclusion in a different type of study. A Southern textile plant had been swept by “hysterical contagion”: a few, then more and more workers, claiming bites from a mysterious ‘insect,’ became nauseous, numb, and weak, leading to a plant shutdown. When the affected workers were asked to name their three best friends, many named one another, but the very *earliest* to be stricken were social isolates, receiving almost no choices. An explanation, compatible with Becker’s, is offered: since the symptoms might be thought odd, early “adopters” were likely to be found among the marginal, those less subject to social pressures. Later, “it is increasingly likely that some persons who are socially integrated will be affected. . . . The contagion enters social networks and is disseminated with increasing rapidity” (p. 13). This is consistent with Rogers’s comment that while the *first* adopters of innovations are marginal, the next group, “early adopters,” “are a more integrated part of the local social system than the innovators” (1962, p. 183).

“Central” and “marginal” individuals may well be motivated as claimed; but if the marginal are genuinely so, it is difficult to see how they can ever spread innovations successfully. We may surmise that since the resistance to a risky or deviant activity is greater than to a safe or normal one, a larger number of people will have to be exposed to it and adopt it, in the early stages, before it will spread in a chain reaction. Individuals with many weak ties are, by my arguments, best placed to diffuse such a difficult in- novation, since some of those ties will be local bridges.<label for="sn-12" class="margin-toggle sidenote-number"></label><input type="checkbox" id="sn-12" class="margin-toggle"/>
<span class="sidenote">
These individuals are what is often called, in organizational analysis, “liaison persons,” though their role here is different from the one usually discussed. (Cf. the concept in graph theory of a “cut point”—-one which, if removed from a graph, disconnects one part from another [Harary 1965].) In general, a bridge has one liaison person on each side, but the existence of a liaison person does not imply that of a bridge. For local bridges, the concept of local liaisons could be developed. In a more microscopically oriented discussion I would devote more time to the liaison role. For now, I only point out that, under the present assumptions, one can be a liaison between two network sectors only if all his ties into one or both are weak.
</span> An initially unpopular innovation spread by those with few weak ties is more likely to be confined to a few cliques, thus being stillborn and never finding its way into a diffusion study.

That the “marginal” innovators of diffusion studies might actually be rich in *weak* ties is possible, given the usual sociometric technique, but in most cases this is purely speculative. Kerckhoff and Back, however, in a later more detailed analysis of the hysteria incident, indicate that besides asking about one’s “three best friends,” they also asked with whom workers ate, worked, shared car pools, etc. They report that five of the six workers earliest affected “are social isolates when friendship choices are used as the basis of analysis. Only 1 of the 6 is mentioned as a friend by *anyone* in our sample. This is made even more striking when we note that these 6 women are mentioned with considerable frequency when other bases for choice are used. In fact, they are chosen more frequently on a ‘non-friendship’ basis than are the women in any of the other categories” (1968, p. 112).

This finding lends credence to the weak-tie argument, but is inconclusive. A somewhat different kind of diffusion study offers more direct support: the "small-world" investigations of Milgram and his associates. The name of these studies stems from the typical comment of newly introduced individuals who discover some common acquaintance; this situation is generalized in an attempt to measure, for arbitrarily chosen pairs of individuals in the United States, how long a path of personal contacts would be needed to connect them. A booklet is given to randomly designated senders who are asked to forward it toward some named target person, via someone the sender knows personally who would be more likely than himself to know the target. The new recipient then advances the booklet similarly; eventually it reaches the target or someone fails to send it on. The proportion of such chains completed has ranged from 12% to 33% in different studies, and the number of links in completed chains has ranged from two to 10, averaging between five and eight (Milgram 1967; Travers and Milgram 1969; Korte and Milgram 1970).

Each time someone forwards a booklet he also sends a postcard to the researchers, indicating, among other things, the relationship between him- self and the next receiver. Two of the categories which can be chosen are “friend” and ‘acquaintance.” I will assume that this corresponds to “strong” and “weak” ties. In one of the studies, white senders were asked to forward the booklet to a target who was Negro. In such chains, a crucial point was the *first* sending of the booklet from a white to a Negro. In 50% of the instances where the white described this Negro as an "acquaintance," the chain was ultimately completed; completion rate fell to 26%, however, when the white sent the booklet to a Negro “friend.” (My computation, based on unpublished data kindly supplied by Charles Korte. See Korte [1967] and Korte and Milgram [1970].) Thus, weaker interracial ties can be seen to be more effective in bridging social distance.


